README.md, before:

### Creating a Minimum Viable Specification

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*SnlGS2An3ImFw4XlNMFnKA.jpeg)

<span class="figcaption_hack">*(courtesy of * [KEYJ](http://keyj.com/random-things-to-do-in-abilene-when-youre-bored/)*)*</span>

If you’ve never read about the Abilene Paradox, go [read about
it](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abilene_paradox). (Or if you have a bit more
time, read [the original
article](http://homepages.se.edu/cvonbergen/files/2013/01/The-Abilene-Paradox_The-Management-of-Agreement.htm_.pdf).)
The basic idea is that many times groups or organizations make decisions,
thinking that they are working collaboratively, and deliver an outcome none of
the participants wanted. The process of making that decision results in missed
expectations and projects that are a disappointment. The real output here is
wasted effort and frustration.

**We all want to build great products and services** — full stop — and we
sometimes get there. With the right tools and process, people collaborate
remotely, locally, synchronously and asynchronously to build software products
and services that deliver the almost-magical *product-market fit.* We’ve all
seen the results of this work, as it usually is the hallmark of the services we
use every day.

An anti-pattern often occurs when teams set out to build The Next Big Thing (or
even the next small thing). People fail to deliver a product, feature, or idea
because they didn’t build a great specification that helped the team organize
around a shared understanding to think about, design, and build that thing. Yep,
specs. Some people reading this may think “I’m out — anything that depends upon
a spec is already flawed and will never work.” This essay is not for you.

### **The Problem of “Just Build It And Figure Out How Later”**

There are many screamingly obvious things that cause projects or companies to
fail, and yet people (us included) make the exact same mistakes over and over.

You may know some of them as:

* Delivering a project late or way over budget
* Playing “Whack-a-mole” with bugs on different clients and platforms
* The Angry Faces of Business Stakeholders when they realize the thing they got
doesn’t do the thing they were going to get
* Confusion and apathy by customers who your team feels “just don’t get it”
* Hand wringing and confusion by internal staff who have no idea how to explain
the new thing and what it does

#### This is not new.

I’ve talked to friends at other companies about their “black sheep projects”.
I’ve thought a lot about the projects I’ve managed that could have gone better.
These failed projects have a common thread: a specification that is too
complicated, has multiple owners, or just isn’t done.

When you talk to the individual leaders of teams about these projects, whether
directly to engineering, to operations, or leadership, you hear similar things:

* We weren’t involved in the specification
* The delivered product was different than what we thought
* *It’s someone else’s job to fix this.*

And you don’t usually hear about the solutions those teams worked on together to
deliver a different result.

#### Some Teams Figure It Out.

The best teams trust their individual contributors and their managers to do the
jobs they are excellent at getting done. The best teams have mechanisms for
“raising your hand” when unexpected results occur. And the best teams treat
conflict as an expected outcome and have mechanisms in place for expecting and
resolving that conflict.

Remember, behavior change is hard. It’s easy to think of the extreme solutions
(Just Build, or SPEC ALL THE THINGS) and important to propose incremental
improvements likely to be adopted by the average team member.

### **Fixing with The Smallest Change Possible**

What if there were a Minimum Viable Specification?

What would be in it? Who would write it? And how would you measure that it was
any better than the failed processes and decisions we make today?

#### A Suggestion

**What is a Minimum Viable Specification?**

1.  The clearest path to what you need to do to get to done.
1.  Small enough to declare a single problem and solution in about 15 minutes, but
not smaller.
1.  Big enough to avoid writing a specification for every idea.
1.  A name we all use to describe the idea.
1.  A description of the problem statement, the assumptions we’re making, and why we
are doing this thing.
1.  A statement of the outputs we expect from this specification.
1.  The way we will measure how things are going and how often.
1.  How we propose to expend time, cost, and effort to do it and consequently, when
we think it will be done.
1.  A place we are able to discuss how things are going.
1.  A Parking Lot for the ideas we generate that don’t matter right now.

[See an example template](http://bit.ly/minimumviablespec).

### Enough Description to Fit the Back of a Napkin

This project will be a failure if it creates the very situation it is trying to
resolve. We’ve all seen what happens with projects that attempt to describe
every eventuality. They never get done. 

The idea of a Minimum Viable Specification will also not succeed if it’s so
atomic that you can’t use it for a decent-sized project (at least two developers
for one sprint).

What would success look like for a Minimum Viable Specification? When business
and engineering teams work together to create simple and valuable statements
that they use to deliver better projects and products, one spec at a time.

### How do I get started?

If you’re interested in helping, please consider doing one of the following
things:

* Contribute to the project at
[https://github.com/gregmeyer/minimum-viable-specification](https://github.com/gregmeyer/minimum-viable-specification)
— suggest changes to the example template, or create your own template
* If you don’t have a GitHub account and want a Google Docs version, see
[here](http://bit.ly/minimumviablespec).

Commit message:

added paragraph explicating wasted effort

README.md, after:

### Creating a Minimum Viable Specification

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*SnlGS2An3ImFw4XlNMFnKA.jpeg)

<span class="figcaption_hack">*(courtesy of * [KEYJ](http://keyj.com/random-things-to-do-in-abilene-when-youre-bored/)*)*</span>

If you’ve never read about the Abilene Paradox, go [read about
it](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abilene_paradox). (Or if you have a bit more
time, read [the original
article](http://homepages.se.edu/cvonbergen/files/2013/01/The-Abilene-Paradox_The-Management-of-Agreement.htm_.pdf).)
The basic idea is that many times groups or organizations make decisions,
thinking that they are working collaboratively, and deliver an outcome none of
the participants wanted. The process of making that decision results in missed
expectations and projects that are a disappointment. The real output here is
wasted effort and frustration.

The reasons for the wasted effort are varied, and some of them include:

- poor expectation setting leading to low engagement and commitment
- weak requirements, because no one set expectations for the group
- results that don’t follow (too-high) expectations
- and a general lack of transparency

In short, we could do better.

**We all want to build great products and services** — full stop — and we
sometimes get there. With the right tools and process, people collaborate
remotely, locally, synchronously and asynchronously to build software products
and services that deliver the almost-magical *product-market fit.* We’ve all
seen the results of this work, as it usually is the hallmark of the services we
use every day.

An anti-pattern often occurs when teams set out to build The Next Big Thing (or
even the next small thing). People fail to deliver a product, feature, or idea
because they didn’t build a great specification that helped the team organize
around a shared understanding to think about, design, and build that thing. Yep,
specs. Some people reading this may think “I’m out — anything that depends upon
a spec is already flawed and will never work.” This essay is not for you.

### **The Problem of “Just Build It And Figure Out How Later”**

There are many screamingly obvious things that cause projects or companies to
fail, and yet people (us included) make the exact same mistakes over and over.

You may know some of them as:

* Delivering a project late or way over budget
* Playing “Whack-a-mole” with bugs on different clients and platforms
* The Angry Faces of Business Stakeholders when they realize the thing they got
doesn’t do the thing they were going to get
* Confusion and apathy by customers who your team feels “just don’t get it”
* Hand wringing and confusion by internal staff who have no idea how to explain
the new thing and what it does

#### This is not new.

I’ve talked to friends at other companies about their “black sheep projects”.
I’ve thought a lot about the projects I’ve managed that could have gone better.
These failed projects have a common thread: a specification that is too
complicated, has multiple owners, or just isn’t done.

When you talk to the individual leaders of teams about these projects, whether
directly to engineering, to operations, or leadership, you hear similar things:

* We weren’t involved in the specification
* The delivered product was different than what we thought
* *It’s someone else’s job to fix this.*

And you don’t usually hear about the solutions those teams worked on together to
deliver a different result.

#### Some Teams Figure It Out.

The best teams trust their individual contributors and their managers to do the
jobs they are excellent at getting done. The best teams have mechanisms for
“raising your hand” when unexpected results occur. And the best teams treat
conflict as an expected outcome and have mechanisms in place for expecting and
resolving that conflict.

Remember, behavior change is hard. It’s easy to think of the extreme solutions
(Just Build, or SPEC ALL THE THINGS) and important to propose incremental
improvements likely to be adopted by the average team member.

### **Fixing with The Smallest Change Possible**

What if there were a Minimum Viable Specification?

What would be in it? Who would write it? And how would you measure that it was
any better than the failed processes and decisions we make today?

#### A Suggestion

**What is a Minimum Viable Specification?**

1.  The clearest path to what you need to do to get to done.
1.  Small enough to declare a single problem and solution in about 15 minutes, but
not smaller.
1.  Big enough to avoid writing a specification for every idea.
1.  A name we all use to describe the idea.
1.  A description of the problem statement, the assumptions we’re making, and why we
are doing this thing.
1.  A statement of the outputs we expect from this specification.
1.  The way we will measure how things are going and how often.
1.  How we propose to expend time, cost, and effort to do it and consequently, when
we think it will be done.
1.  A place we are able to discuss how things are going.
1.  A Parking Lot for the ideas we generate that don’t matter right now.

[See an example template](http://bit.ly/minimumviablespec).

### Enough Description to Fit the Back of a Napkin

This project will be a failure if it creates the very situation it is trying to
resolve. We’ve all seen what happens with projects that attempt to describe
every eventuality. They never get done. 

The idea of a Minimum Viable Specification will also not succeed if it’s so
atomic that you can’t use it for a decent-sized project (at least two developers
for one sprint).

What would success look like for a Minimum Viable Specification? When business
and engineering teams work together to create simple and valuable statements
that they use to deliver better projects and products, one spec at a time.

### How do I get started?

If you’re interested in helping, please consider doing one of the following
things:

* Contribute to the project at
[https://github.com/gregmeyer/minimum-viable-specification](https://github.com/gregmeyer/minimum-viable-specification)
— suggest changes to the example template, or create your own template
* If you don’t have a GitHub account and want a Google Docs version, see
[here](http://bit.ly/minimumviablespec).
